Hello, YouTube. Hello, Ryan. Hello, Joe. Hey, Mike. Hey, Michael. Hey, all. If you're out
there watching the live stream, please feel free to throw some comments in, or I guess
if you're watching later in the comment section below. But live comments, we'll try to make
them part of the show. And with that, let's kick off the podcast. Joe, Ryan, welcome to
Talk Python to Me. Hey, it's great to be here. Thanks for having us. It's fantastic to have
I'm really excited to talk about earth science
and all the cool large-scale computing stuff
and cloud computing and things like that with you.
It'll be a lot of fun.
So really looking forward to getting into that.
Now, before we dive into the topics,
let's just start with your story.
Joe, I guess you go first.
How'd you get into programming and Python?
- Yeah, so my path came through grad school.
I was studying civil engineering and climate modeling
as a graduate student at the University of Washington.
I was in a computational hydrology group,
so we were doing lots of computer things.
And my PhD advisor at the time was like,
"We wanna do Python stuff.
I don't know anything about it,
or I don't know much about it.
You should be the kind of the guinea pig student
to bring our group into the modern era."
So, kind of threw me to the wolves,
And I ended up really kind of taking on a role that like,
not just learned it,
but then started teaching other people.
And I ended up contributing to open source packages
and kind of the rest is history.
- Oh, that's fantastic.
What were you using before?
You said you brought them into the modern era.
Where were you coming from?
What was the dark ages?
- Yeah, some terrible mix of like Perl and C shell
and C and Fortran and a bunch of other shell scripting
languages. So it's a total spaghetti land.
Wow. That is a spaghetti land.
I would say Python and Jupiter and the sci-fi stack probably sounds a little
simpler.
Yeah. The connections are a little more natural for sure.
Indeed. How did people receive it?
It's been, I mean, it's been great. I think for me personally, it was like,
uh, quite the revolution revolution and what was possible.
but then passing it around the lab
and then around kind of the research community since then,
I think it's been overwhelmingly positively received
and we're doing totally different things
than we could have done without it.
And I think that's the big change.
It's not just that it's like a little easier to program,
but that you can do things
that you couldn't have done before.
- Interesting.
Yeah, people worry that, you know,
coming from C and Fortran,
that Python wasn't fast enough.
They're like, we can't use this.
This is one of these slow scripting languages.
or was it you'd already proven it was fine?
- No, I think, I mean, you hear that on occasion,
but I think the developer velocity,
like outweighs that in 99% of the cases.
- Yeah, I agree.
- You can always optimize the 1% case further.
- For sure.
Ryan, how about you?
How'd you get into programming in Python?
- Kind of been a lifelong programmer.
So I was actually just thinking back when you asked that,
I think I wrote my first basic code at age seven.
My dad worked for IBM.
And so I'm like really been like a kind of lifelong computer
nerd, drifted away from that a little bit in college
where I majored in physics.
But then in graduate school, I did a PhD in climate physics
and chemistry at MIT.
And I had a huge need for scientific computing in that.
So all of a sudden, sort of my computer stuff
started really coming back full and center my world.
And it was a MATLAB shop, you know,
MATLAB Fortran was the stack, you know, there.
And after I sort of did my first project
around 2006, 2007 in MATLAB,
I decided, you know, I just, I'd been doing open source,
you know, hackery for in other languages for many years.
And I was like, oh, I got it.
I need an open source scientific computing solution.
So I tried Python, got into Python around 2008.
So that was when, like, I've been at it long enough
to have like compiled NumPy.
- Yeah, that's like really when NumPy was basically
coming out is right around that time.
- Before Anaconda and the other one.
And, you know, then just rolled with it ever since.
So I was like the early adopter Python guy around there.
I like, you know, helped get a lot of other people into it.
but it was still always just in my own projects, right?
Like there was no community.
I really got into open source community development
probably around 2014, 2015, when I discovered X-Array.
And that is like the project that really like turned me
from just a user to a contributor.
- Fantastic.
Yeah, that's like multi-dimensional numpy goodness, right?
- Yeah, we'll get into it.
Yeah.
Was that other distribution to Anaconda?
Was that Canopy?
- Yes, Canopy.
- I see out in the audience.
Thank you, Yuri.
Cool.
The other one I was thinking of was ActiveState.
So yeah, there's these different distributions
people can get for optimizing for different stuff.
It's great.
All right, how about now?
Ryan, what are you doing day to day?
It sounds like you both are still doing
research university-like things.
- Absolutely.
So I'm a professor here at Columbia University in LeMont.
Earth Observatory and I sort of manage a medium-sized scientific research lab and
teach at the University, but then I like wear this total other hat as like an
open-source developer and contributor and so that can that can be sometimes a
little exhausting to try and wear both those hats at the same time, but I
really enjoy it. Our work in our lab is focused on computational
oceanography, trying to understand the role the ocean plays in the climate system, particularly
the role that small-scale ocean processes, eddies, fronts, instabilities that are occurring
like at the, say, 10 to 100 kilometer scale, how that sort of turbulence and variability
influences a large-scale ocean and the role it plays in our changing climate.
The way we do that research is by working with large scale satellite data from NASA.
So I'm involved in the NASA surface water and ocean topography science team, a new satellite mission that's launching this year.
I do a ton of numerical modeling, simulating the ocean with computers.
And so, you know, at the end of the day, we're doing data analysis, some of which was sort of traditional statistics and visualization.
Increasingly, machine learning, AI, ML
are part of our toolkit that we use
to try and understand the ocean.
But the bottom line is, yeah,
just working with a lot of data every day,
diverse projects, and that has really forced me
to center the rule of these tools in our work
and recognize them as sort of,
that is our, like a lot of my colleagues,
in other buildings at our lab,
like they'll have like a million dollar mass spectrometer.
they have an instrument they use to do science.
- Some crazy laser or something, right?
- Yeah, and they turn the crank.
And we're a data-driven lab.
And so I think of Pangeo in a way as our instrument
that we all contribute to and maintain
that then helps us to do all of the research projects
that we wanna pursue.
- Yeah, how fascinating.
I think you talked about running a research lab
and then also doing this open source thing,
this dual hat thing.
The world may has changed,
but when I took a couple of computer science classes
at university when I was my undergraduate degree,
I didn't feel like a lot of the instructors
or professors there really had much real world experience
in programming and stuff.
And I think things like this, like contributing to X-Ray,
it must give you this really grounded sense of,
not only these are the tools that you can use,
but like, here's how it works.
These are the people doing it.
Like you're in the trenches.
Like, do you think that makes a big difference?
- I think we have a major education problem
around computational science in that there's no,
and I say this as someone like a university professor,
like we have no curriculum to teach someone
how to be like an effective computational science,
and particularly in the context of like open source,
community-driven software development.
We have computer science classes
that will teach you a lot of great things
about algorithms and data structures
and even machine learning,
but they won't teach you how to write effective software.
And as you said, currently we assume
you have to learn that in the trenches,
just getting into a project,
maybe you work at a company.
For me, definitely I upped my software engineering game
so much after I got involved in community open source
'cause there were people like Stephan Hoyer,
Google staff engineer who were like reviewing my PRs.
And so that was huge, but I wish actually
the university could teach this skillset
'cause I think it would help the world a lot.
- Yeah, I think it would as well.
I think we can absolutely find space
in the curriculum for it.
I think math might need to give up a little bit
to allow for computational math rather than symbolic math.
If I could pick, I don't want to do realist too much
and I would do one of your,
let Joe go to Chinstock as well.
But I think geometry and the going through proofs
and the thinking about how do I take axioms
and using proofs to solve problems
is exactly the same mindset and the way of thinking
as solving a computer program
or solving a problem with a program.
And I haven't applied geometry that much,
but I've sure applied a lot of computers.
So anyway, I just put that out there for people.
- You might be a little biased.
- I may be a little biased.
Although I do have two math degrees for what it's worth.
- Yeah, there you go.
- But I'm still willing to put geometry out there.
Anyway, Joe, how about you?
What are you doing these days?
- Yeah, so I wear a couple hats as well.
My main hat is I'm the technology director at Carbon Plan,
a nonprofit that's working on the climate problem.
And there, our focus is really on improving the transparency
and the scientific integrity
and quality of climate solutions.
And we do that by building open source tools and open data
and doing research into the various climate solutions that
are out there.
So we use a lot of open source software to do that.
And we build a lot of open source tooling,
including software, to help tell stories
about different climate solutions.
The other hat I wear, I'm a scientist
at the National Center for Atmospheric Research,
where that part of my role looks a lot like Ryan's day to day.
We study different things, but I work with big climate model
data and do data analysis and all of that.
- Yeah, it sounds really fascinating.
At Carbon Plant, what kind of data do you all use?
Do you like hook into electric grids?
Do you analyze the mixture of electric grids
or transportation or what kind of problems
and things do you solve in there?
- Yeah, so it's a bit of everything.
We do big data, little data and everything in between.
But, so like one of the areas we spend a lot of time
working is in the area of forest offsets
and trying to ask questions about the quality
and the potential of using forests as a climate solution.
And so there we're using everything
from in situ observations where people go out
and measure trees with a tape measure
and they do that every five years.
And that's like actually a fairly small data set
even though there's a lot of trees out there.
It's just, there's only so many measurements you can make.
And then we also work with climate model data.
we study climate risk to forests.
And so there we're building models
of future forest fire risk
and trying to understand how that's gonna change
in the future.
So that's like big data stuff.
We're doing lots and lots of model building
and machine learning and that sort of thing
on top of climate model data.
- That sounds fascinating.
You and I are both in the Pacific Northwest
and last year was not too terrible for fire season,
but recently we've had some pretty bad forest fires up here
and it's definitely concerning.
- Yeah, it definitely feels like
I'm studying the world around me more than ever
when we're working on these fire problems
and then also experiencing the smoky weather
that we've been having in the summers
in the West Coast the last few years.
- Yeah, it's been pretty crazy.
- And I mean, I think that's a theme
in climate science right now.
It's gone very quickly from this academic problem
to something that so much of society
and our economy is engaging with.
Companies are just getting to work
on adapting to climate change
because they're feeling it in their bottom line.
And it's different than things were 10 years ago.
- Well, that's good to hear.
I'm both pessimistic and optimistic
about how things could go.
There are so many cool discoveries.
Folks like you are using Python and computation
to really understand exactly what's happening
and keep your finger on the pulse of where they're going.
And then also I see a mom and her one small kid
in a Chevy Suburban next to me idling in traffic.
And it's like, I don't know.
People do have to internalize it, I think a little bit more,
but I wonder if it is maybe in business,
they're starting to react a little bit sooner, right?
I think companies feel pressure of economics sooner
than people do a lot of the times.
- Yeah, I think that's true.
I think there's also social pressures
that are pushing companies to act soon.
And so it's not just, sometimes it's altruistic,
but also I think there's marketing involved in--
- Right, just don't wanna look like the bad company
if they can put on a good image and it's worth it.
But whatever gets them to do it, I don't care if it's--
- Yeah, that's what I was just gonna say.
We don't have to shame that.
I think that there's a lot of action that needs to happen
in a lot of sectors right now.
And so to the extent we can motivate that
through one mechanism or another,
that sounds like a good idea.
- We're getting maybe down this climate rabbit hole,
but this is probably the most important issue of our time.
So let's go down it.
I mean, you gotta distinguish between,
the terms we use are mitigation versus adaptation, right?
So mitigating climate is doing things
like burning less fossil fuels
that are gonna reduce the potential impacts
of climate change.
Adaptation is just accepting
that climate change is happening, is going to happen, and changing our behavior like
infrastructure, planning.
And so when I say I see a lot of companies taking action, I see especially a lot of companies
taking action from where I sit on adaptation, using Earth system data, using our projections
from our climate models to make business decisions under this changing climate.
Mitigation is what we've been calling for for decades.
that's where like the Chevy Suburban comes in and you know, I I guess I really
push back against the idea that like
Personal choices are like an important part of mitigation
This is I think this narrative has actually been counterproductive
Like I don't think we need to rely on personal like ethical choices about like which type of like, you know
Bags to bring to the grocery store. I mean like it's important but like what this is a very very large scale
It's solving the problem. I think very, very much on the edges when you're just going like but there's this huge middle part
What are we doing? We need global scale regulation around carbon emissions in order to mitigate climate and that's a political problem
Yes, it is
Well, the renewable energy story seems to be coming on faster than people thought recently. So there is a lot of hope in that space
Now let's talk, you know, you both mentioned a little bit of this sort of blend of
like open source side of things and then the the science side of things let's just talk for a moment about
Just some general best practices with open source and science and stuff like that. So
Yeah
One of the things I guess is Ryan you talked about
having people like these high-end software engineers reviewing your code and stuff and I suspect there's a lot of
lessons you've learned that you can kind of bring back to the science world from that open source experience?
I think there's this whole spectrum of
open science, right, and open source activities, right? So right now it's pretty common in scientific fields to encourage
projects, research projects, to publish their research code under
an open license or put it on github or something like that and
There's you know, I see that it's just like a very very first step towards a much more
Transformative way we we do science as a community, right?
like as you well know like just putting a
Repo up on github has essentially no no impact right like if no like no one uses it like if someone
pushes their their commit and in a forest and and no one you know, here's it land like okay great like you checked a box
The real goal of open science is to encourage more reuse
more collaboration and and accelerate the velocity of scientific discovery and
That takes more than just putting your code out there
It takes of course putting your code out there the first step
but it actually takes making sure people can run it.
Like they have the environment for it.
Like they can access the data that it needs to run, that they understand what it can do, that it's coded in a way
that is extensible and modular, right? And all of those things are a lot more than a license. They're about essentially writing good
scientific code. And so, yeah, I do think that just the process of getting involved in open source is a huge
form of education for scientists about how
collaboration can work, not just even in code, but in general,
the way the collaboration process works in a well-functioning
open source project is kind of miraculous.
Yeah, it absolutely is.
And, you know, there's a lot of barometers people use when they go
and look at an open source project to decide, can I trust this thing?
Right.
The obvious ones are like, how many stars and forks, like, is it a popular
that people seem to care about, but others are, does it have tests or does it seem to be operated
in a way that is going to lead to contributors being able to contribute and the software
evolving over time in a way that they could depend upon, right? Yeah, I think another thing here
that's really important to think about is what the incentive structures are for a researcher working
on a scientific programming problem.
Absolutely.
For most graduate students or researchers at institutions that Ryan and I work at, the
goal is to write a paper or to produce a dataset.
The software has been thought of as a tool you use to get there, but it's not necessarily
a tool that you fix or improve along the way.
And I think one of the things that we've been trying to do is break that pattern a little
bit and think of that.
the whole ecosystem of tools that we're working with
is improvable so that we don't have to reinvent the wheel.
And individual researchers have,
I actually, and maybe just speaking for myself,
being able to say, okay, I'm gonna take a,
rather than take the shortcut path
to get to the end of the paper,
I'm gonna improve the ecosystem
so that later on I can reuse this improvement,
but also Ryan and others in the community can reuse it.
And that's a fundamentally different way
thinking about the tools you're using.
- That's interesting, it sure is.
I've only spent a couple of years in that space,
but my experience was so much of the code,
at least traditionally, had been written
just to solve a very focused problem
and not in a way that could be
adapted to future problems, right?
It'd be like, well, we're changing the algorithm,
or it's slightly different data,
so we'll make a copy of this script,
and we'll copy it over there,
and we'll just like, you know,
maybe there's not a single function in the whole thing,
It's just top to bottom.
And I suspect adopting some of these techniques
to sort of produce more of a library out of it,
even if you put it on GitHub and nobody comes,
it still would benefit you and your research
over time, I would imagine.
- And I would say that is a big part of Python
and why Python is a good tool for science
because it is easy to build higher level abstractions.
coming from the MATLAB world, you basically got MATLAB and its toolboxes,
and then you got your scripts.
And there's this hard divide between the platform and the tool,
and your own work.
And so you're used to thinking,
"Well, these are the primitives provided by the tool,
and here's what I have to do."
But Python allows you to build very flexibly,
and has this great ecosystem, right?
And so I mean, I think this segues naturally into X-Ray.
Like many of us in, say, in 2014 had our own sort of private version of a code
that did what X-Ray did, thinking like that's code that needs to live in user space.
That's not a package provided by the ecosystem.
But then once sort of X-Ray started to catch on and we realized how powerful and how cool it was
and how well it was, like what a solid foundation it had,
many of us immediately stopped working on our own sort of private X-ray like thing and started
contributing to X-ray. And we've seen over, say, the past, you know, five or six years, this really
steady growth in like the capabilities, both in terms of features and robustness like of X-ray,
that we never would have done if there hadn't been that coalescence around, like, okay, we're all
going to work together on this. Yeah. And then you have these knock on effects, right? There's now
other libraries and other systems that use X-Ray.
And so if you're programming against it,
it's super easy to plug into it,
kind of like what Pandas and Dask are doing.
Like if you program against Pandas,
you kind of automatically get like the scale up version
because Dask is just Pandas, but more, right?
- And you don't have to write code to like read CSVs.
- Yes, exactly.
So I gave the elevator pitch for X-Ray,
but let's go ahead and dive into that.
And maybe give us the story for Pangeo
where X-ray is one of the sort of umbrella,
is covered under that umbrella.
- Yeah, so, yeah, I'll start,
but I think, you know, just to take maybe a slight step back
and say what X-ray is one more time, I think.
So X-ray is a package, a Python package
for working with multidimensional labeled arrays
and datasets, and it integrates with NumPy and Pandas,
and in many ways you can think of it
is a multi-dimensional pandas.
- Yeah.
- And so it's used really widely
in the climate science community and the geosciences,
but it's also used in fields outside of the geosciences.
- Right.
Could be finance or all sorts of things, right?
- Yeah, so finance and biomedical
and bioimaging, et cetera.
So-
- Give us a sense of like the data that you might load up
off of some oceanography studies.
Oh yeah, Ryan, go ahead and take the oceanography example.
- Like something I think that like our go-to data set
for oceanography is like ocean sea surface temperatures.
Satellites observe the ocean from space,
infrared or microwave observations
can tell how warm the water is.
That gets processed by NASA.
They distribute essentially a bunch of net CDF files
that are up on like a, basically an HTTP or FTP server,
One file per day for the past 30 years,
quarter-degree resolution, each file is a couple of 10,
10, 20 megabytes or something like that.
And we want to do an analysis on that data.
And so X-Ray can open that individual file,
but it can also open that collection of thousands of files
as one coherent dataset object.
- Interesting, so do you give it something like a directory
and a file pattern and it just somehow does a sort
and then loads them up together?
- Yep, it can do globbing, you can pass it a list.
And actually that is one of the killer features of X-Ray
that I think brought a lot of people into it.
'Cause we were all kind of used to writing code around files
like, okay, I've got to do this analysis.
Here's like a hundred files for each file
in my list of files, do this, right?
and instead the workflow changes with X-Ray.
It's like, okay, open multi-file data set,
mean, done, right?
Like, and so it's just like this cognitive load
that's lifted.
- That's cool.
Yeah, there's, especially in the data science space,
I see a lot of these things,
and it's almost about learning about the packages
and the way that you can use them.
You know, like an example that really quickly comes to mind
for me is like, if I wanted to get a table
out of an HTML page, out of a website,
and then pull that in and like process it,
I could go get the page with requests.
I could do some beautiful soup thing to find the table.
And then I could, I don't know,
try to parse it or something,
and then convert the elements
if they were really supposed to be numbers,
you gotta parse them as numbers,
and then get that into some data structure.
Or you go to Pandas and you say,
read HTML tables bracket two or something like that.
Like those kinds of things seem to appear so much
in these data science libraries.
Like, oh, you could do this big long computer sciencey thing.
You could call this function over here
and you got the same outcome.
And it's really about knowing about that those exist, right?
- Yeah, totally.
So, okay, to go back to your original question,
I mean, we can come back to X,
I think we've spent a long time on X-ray,
but I wanted to make the connection
since you have the Pangeo website up on the screen.
- Yeah, yeah.
- After a couple of years of working on X-ray,
a handful of us were starting to think,
okay, we're onto something here.
This is really the beginnings of
kind of a platform for doing research.
So we all got together at Columbia University.
Ryan hosted a workshop in late 2016.
I don't even remember what the name of the workshop was,
PyAOS, Atmosphere Ocean Sciences, or something like that.
It was a name that got dropped pretty quickly.
But the idea was that we were,
it was probably 20 of us that worked on X-ray and Dask,
mostly, and it was kind of a mix of software developers
and scientists.
We got together and just kind of shared out the use cases
that we were wrestling with and the problems.
And out of that grew the Pangea Project and a few ideas.
So the mission that you read on the website today
is what we wrote that weekend, which is to try to tackle
a few key problems that we're facing in our community,
mostly big data, reproducibility,
and really aiming at supporting a software ecosystem
that connected all those dots.
And since then, the Pangea project has grown
into a wider community project
that has a lot of software packages involved,
not just X-Ray and Dask.
So that's the origin story.
It really started with X-Ray as the beginnings.
Okay, interesting.
And then from there it became a bunch of other things.
Yeah, very cool.
Maybe we could talk a little bit about the other packages.
So we've got X-Ray and then there's a list of packages on the website.
Iris, I know you all don't do too much with Iris,
but maybe just tell us really quick what that is.
- Yeah, Iris is in, it sits at the same level
of the stack as X-Ray.
So you're probably using either X-Ray or Iris.
And Iris is, I would say,
like it's maybe a little bit more opinionated than X-Ray
in the sense that it's scoped to like geo data or like data,
you know, or that has things built into it
that are like more specific to that domain.
- Like some of the specific file formats,
which I'm not familiar with, but like grib and--
No, actually, X-Ray gets all of those file formats.
-Oh, okay. -It's more--
I think it's more about the API,
like an understanding that what latitude and longitude actually mean
and supporting things like re-gridding directly
rather than, say, through third-party packages
like we would use with X-Ray.
It's a great project,
and it is in many ways very complementary to X-Ray
and highly interoperable as well.
You can like X-ray to Iris dataset,
you know, Iris dataset to X-ray.
You can think of them all as wrappers
of higher level data structures around arrays, right?
So many of us have probably coded, written,
if you work with NumPy at any level,
you probably had a dictionary with NumPy arrays in it,
like multiple different arrays you want to keep together.
And at that point I would say like just use X-ray
whenever you're starting to program in that pattern.
- Yeah, because that's basically what X-ray is, right?
As how do you label it?
That's the keys.
And then multidimensional is multiple arrays, right?
- Yes, and then understanding relationships between these
and then metadata, another huge part of this, right?
Like, so X-ray, both X-ray and Iris
and anything in this space is gonna really understand
metadata that comes with those things.
So things like units or conventions
that tell you how the variables are related to each other.
And then it can do things with that metadata computationally,
not just like drag it around for posterity,
but actually leverage it to make certain syntax
or certain computation.
- You filter by all the ones that are tagged
by state or whatever.
Interesting. - Yep.
- Okay, so then the next one in the overall banner
of Pangeo is Dask.
I've had Matthew Rocklin on the show before
to talk about Dask, but it's been a while.
So maybe tell folks about Dask.
- Yeah, so Dask is a library for doing parallel computing
in Python, and it has a bunch of different containers.
And so there's Dask array, which is what X-ray uses,
but there's also a Dask data frame,
which does kind of parallel chunked operations
on pandas data frames.
And then there's the like catch all the Dask bag,
which does graph style parallel computing.
So where this comes in for X-ray is that,
and actually for Iris as well,
since we were just talking about Iris,
but the arrays in an X-ray dataset can be backed
by a Dask array instead of a NumPy array.
And by just kind of swapping that out,
it's almost a behind the scenes swap out.
You do a dot chunk on your X-ray dataset.
And then your operations are gonna be handled by Dask,
which means they're gonna be streamed
through the Dask scheduler.
You'll be able to scale out to a cluster of workers
and do instead of, you know, say gigabyte style operations,
you can do terabyte scale
or even petabyte scales at some day data analysis.
So Dask is the thing that gives X-Ray
its horizontal scalability.
- Yeah, very cool.
So scaling across machines.
Now, when I learned about Dask,
I saw it as, it's like the local pandas
or the other types of things that models,
but you set up a cluster and it runs there.
And then when I spoke to Matthew about it,
I realized, he pointed out that it's useful
even on a single machine some of the times, right?
If you've got a ton of data, but not enough RAM to hold it,
or even have like my pretty simple computer here
has eight cores, if I run something on Pandas,
I get one core worth of processing power, right?
So maybe, Joey, you're shaking your head,
like tell people about like that use case.
- Yeah, so Dask has a bunch of schedulers
and some of those are local schedulers
that run on a single machine
and they can either use Python's multi-processing module
or threading multiple threads to do computation.
It also has distributed schedulers
that might live on Kubernetes or on an HPC machine.
There's now companies like that,
Matt Rockland has gone on to start Coiled,
which has managed Dask clusters for you.
But the idea is that like at a small scale,
when you're using the threaded scheduler,
it's going to stream computation.
So when you say taking the average of a terabyte size array,
it's going to use its chunks
and process those chunks one at a time
and then aggregate those processed chunks
to the final result.
- Yeah, a lot of times, if it's the simple path
of you go find some tutorial or example code
or something on Stack Overflow,
it's just like, well, first you just load this up,
you read the CSV or you load the JSON file
and then you go over it like this,
and you're like, but I have a terabyte of data
and 16 gigs of RAM,
and so you need this iterative streaming style to get there.
The brilliance of Dask, the game-changing flavor of Dask
is that for many cases, the user doesn't really have to rewrite
their code at all to scale out.
Right? So typically with X-Ray, when we teach it
and we really want to get people the sense of the power,
we start by downloading a 10-megabyte file
and opening it with X-Ray and doing some analysis.
And then they learn the API, and they use it.
And then we point it, then we point people to a massive
100-gigabyte dataset in the cloud and a Dask cluster,
and we say, "Write the same code."
And it just works, and it's pretty fast,
and it is able to scale out without much, really,
any expertise on the user's side about distributed computing.
So I love that feature.
On the other hand, I've also come around to the feeling that it can sometimes,
you know, it's a double-edged sword,
because some things actually just fail
if you don't think hard about the parallelization strategy.
It's not magic.
It depends on the operation that you want to do.
And so the flip side of that ease of parallelization
is that sometimes users will think it is--
Dask is smarter or more capability than it really could ever be,
and expect it to just automatically parallelize anything,
even say, just IO patterns that are just not parallelizable,
not scalable, right?
Or other operations that are just not,
can't be accelerated.
- Yeah, it seems like it just automatically fixes
the problem, it just makes it faster
with magic programming dust,
and then like, obviously,
some points that comes undone, right?
- Totally.
mentioned Coiled at the Rocklands company
that he started with some other folks, I believe.
And this is a really interesting story.
Like we talked about how you've got your X-ray light code
or you got your pandas light code
that you just wrote for yourself.
And then by sort of adopting one of these libraries
and maybe even contributing it and like building it up
you get these knock on effects, right?
So I gave the pandas to Dask example.
And like, here's the next step in that chain, right?
Like now you have, oh, I can just spin up a cluster
on the cloud automatically through coiled
with like one or two lines of code
because I built on Dask because I built on pandas.
You know, like that chain just keeps going
of like how it all sort of,
the synergy between all of them.
- Absolutely.
And I mean, I would say like, it's not just like coincidental
Matt Rocklin was at that Pangeo meeting at Columbia in 2016 or whatever.
And actually, we've watched this evolution.
So a big part of what we have been doing in Pangeo
is experimenting with cloud computing.
I think a little bit earlier and more in a different way
than a lot of the other scientific community was.
And we can thank Matt for that to some degree,
because the story with Pangeo and cloud
is that after that workshop, we wrote our first proposal to the NSF,
and we got a grant to develop some of these stuff
and develop Pangeo and support scientific use cases.
And what we had put into that original grant
were we had a bunch of servers that we wanted to buy
to host data and run stuff, because that's what you do
when you write a scientific grant, right?
And NSF asked us to trim our budget,
And we decided, OK, we'll cut out these servers,
but why don't you give us some credits on the cloud?
Because at the time, NSF was running this pilot program
called Big Data, where they were granting--
it was like a partnership with Google and Amazon and stuff.
And so we got like $100,000 worth of Google Cloud credits.
And we just started playing around
to see how well we could make this stack work in the cloud.
And Matt was instrumental, actually, at that time.
He was really involved and was helping
us figure out how to deploy stuff on the cloud.
And we learned all about Kubernetes and object storage
and all of this stuff.
And it was incredibly fortunate for us to have that
because I think we really figured out a lot of stuff
early on about how scientific research
can interact with cloud computing.
And that's where a lot of our focus and energy is today.
- That's cool.
Yeah, there's a lot of interesting things
about large data sets, right?
You can put them, as you said, in object storage
and then people can come into that cloud
and like use the data without trying to download it
or move it around or like some of these data sets
are terabytes, right?
What are you gonna do to get those shared, right?
- Yeah, I know some of them are petabytes at this point.
And--
- That's terabytes you can do petabytes.
That might be like a little bit beyond
what your ISP is gonna let you do to download.
- That's right, yeah.
- Or you get a hard drive for it, right?
Where are you gonna put it?
- Yeah, exactly.
Yeah, I think that's the big,
The thing that our work on cloud computing
really unlocked for us was this idea that we could federate access
not only to compute, right?
Everyone kind of knew, yeah, you can spin up a VM,
but federating access to the data in a way that was
infinitely scalable, both in terms of access,
but also in storage, is a total game-changer.
And so as we've gone down this rabbit hole,
and we've gone fairly deep at this point,
the idea of putting data in object store
and letting anyone in the research community access that
has kind of revolutionized the way we think
about what scientific computing platforms
should look like going forward.
- Yeah, absolutely.
It solves like half of the problem.
One is the computational time and power,
but the other is just the storage and the data
and the memory and all those kinds of things, right?
- Absolutely.
And I think data providers are really reckoning now
with what the cloud means, right?
Because what we had seen in geosciences
and climate sciences is,
there were a lot of data portals out there.
An agency or a group would decide,
we have a dataset we wanna share,
we have this data we wanna share,
let's make a portal,
which was almost always sort of a highly customized website
with a browser,
and maybe you had to click through to do some JavaScript
and like do it,
like you had to interact with the browser
to get data files and then you would like get some data files.
And, you know, it's like maybe it seemed like a good idea.
There was reasons why they wanted to have a portal.
But like from a user point of view, especially like an expert user point of view,
they're just incredibly frustrating to interact with data that way.
And so with with cloud object storage, you know, I linked in the chat this blog post I wrote about this,
my fantasy about how like how to it's this facetious post about how to create a big data portal.
And you can see there's like one step.
It's like upload your data to S3.
(laughing)
Right?
- Exactly.
- And you know, I think it's provocative,
but like I think it,
the fact is there's a lot of vested energy expertise
within the scientific community
about how to build and maintain
these really bespoke data access solutions
when I think really we should be moving to a very,
we should just really be using object storage
and the scalability of cloud style computing
to distribute scientific data.
It doesn't mean we need to just like go all in on AWS,
although actually that's exactly what NASA has done.
But there's a lot of cloud storage like things
that provide a really scalable base layer of storage
for internet enabled computing.
There's like Wasabi, alternative to Amazon.
there's like CloudFlare now is launching
a data storage service, which I'm super excited about.
- Yeah, that's put it on the edge, interesting.
Yeah, and you might end up with a copy of that data.
Maybe you have a copy in AWS, a copy in Azure,
maybe even like Linode, DigitalOcean, places like that.
Right, but that's only four or five copies,
not every researcher trying to figure out
how they're gonna deal with it, right?
Exactly, or you outsource that sort of mirroring to a service that knows how to scale that sort of thing.
Another really interesting player in this space is IPFS and the distributed web.
Where we're at now is like people are very excited about in science or like about S3 and cloud computing,
but on the other hand, the scientific community is wary of being too dependent on the big tech giants,
and it always has sort of a do-it-yourself
sort of distributed approach to infrastructure.
So I'm really excited about IPFS interplanetary file system,
which is a distributed yet highly performant way
of sharing petabyte scale data on the internet.
- Now that sounds really interesting.
Let's see, really quick, James out in the audience
is asking, are there any Pangeo specific resources
the help with that transition, that jump from the workstation to cloud computing?
Yeah, I think this is a good opportunity to show off
and talk about the list of tutorials
and examples that we have.
So I think, you know,
Pangeo has a collection of Jupyter notebooks
that show how to use...
Yeah, so this is gallery.pangeo.io,
And there's a list of Jupyter Notebooks here
that walk through real-world examples
of working with large geoscientific data in the cloud.
And so I'd encourage people that are listening
to pull this site up and take a look.
- And I'll put a link in the show notes
so people can find it as well.
- Yeah, perfect.
- Yeah.
- Yeah, so I think this is a good example
of one of the best resources we can point folks to.
- Okay.
I mean, to get a little bit more specific,
the idea is actually you don't have to change very much at all
about your workflow when moving to the cloud, right?
That's what we're aiming for with Pangea.
And a key part of this, and sort of another pillar of Pangea
that we haven't discussed yet is Jupyter, right?
So Jupyter is a key part of our effort.
We work very closely with the Jupyter developers
and also the team at 2i2c,
who I know you've talked to recently, right?
And Jupiter has been, I think, an amazing sort of Trojan horse for cloud computing, because
the way when you use Jupiter for the first time, it launches up a notebook in your browser.
Honestly, the hardest way to use Jupiter is to try to use it locally, because you got to install
it and configure it and run it. The cloud story is just even easier.
Exactly. So we now have the scientific community who like scientists, a huge number of scientists
in many different languages are all just used to the idea that we're going to do our science in
our browser through this type of IDE, essentially. And JupyterLab especially has so many more
features than classic notebook that make for a really rich, interactive scientific computing
environment. So then moving the work to the cloud is trivial, I mean, for the user. And so in Pangeo,
we operate some cloud-based JupyterHubs, and also we have been operating in Binder. And those
So those Jupyter hubs, basically you just log on,
like, and anyone out there can actually sign up
for the Pangeo hubs or apply to get access to these hubs.
And then you just have a notebook environment in the cloud.
Of course, just having your notebook in the cloud
is not that cool, but what we can augment it with
are some capabilities to run Dask.
So we use Dask gateway in those hubs
as a Dask deployment solution, but, you know,
Coiled is another example of a Dask deployment solution.
And then the key, though, what is
going to bring scientists to the cloud is that data.
So that is what makes this appealing and game-changing.
The fact that now you log into this hub--
OK, you're in Google Cloud US Central 1.
We got a petabyte of data from the World Climate Research
Program coupled model intercomparison program
project sitting there, organized, analysis-ready,
that you can start doing science with.
So when, before you know that,
if a grad student say would decide,
okay, I'm gonna work with these client models
and do this research project,
they would literally spend months downloading,
organizing and sorting that data on a computer
before they can get started.
Now you can get started in five minutes
and be processing data.
And that's what gets me excited
and motivates me to devote energy to this project.
- Maybe that also involved writing a grant
so that you could get enough compute to locally hold
and work on that and you gotta wait,
okay, I'm gonna order our Silicon Graphics or our Cray
or whatever it is you're getting,
whatever the super computers are these days
and they'll wait for some big thing to show up
or you fire up a notebook in AWS, take your pick.
I suspect this is also democratized computing
somewhat as well.
You don't need as much compute to set up something like this
and access that existing cloud database.
- Yeah, I think that's true.
And I think part of that is we've separated
in the cloud model of separation of concerns,
the storage is not necessarily directly attached to compute.
Whereas like in a super computing center,
it's all one warehouse, right?
And so, yeah, like if you're doing a small problem,
you get a small VM or you get a small cluster,
a small DAS cluster.
If you're doing a big problem, you scale out.
and so you can sort your, or you can arrange
your compute infrastructure appropriate
to the problem you're working on.
And the other thing is the way we're storing the data
allows for partial queries of these large array.
So the data that Ryan was talking about,
the CMIP6 data, it's a petabyte in scale,
but you don't have to open the whole thing
and you don't have to load the whole thing.
We're able to slice into that
and grab out just the parts that are interesting
for the research project.
- Right, exactly.
That's awesome.
One thing I did want to ask you two about real quick
before we're getting short on time here,
but do projects like JupyterLite,
which is Jupyter but running on WebAssembly in the browser
or the Python stack a little bit running on the browser
or PyIoDyed,
do these projects offer any benefits to you all?
Are you tracking them?
Are you interested?
Yeah, I think it's super cool, JupiterLight and Pyodide.
I think it really lowers the bar to providing, just like getting something up and running.
I would say that the motivations for getting into Pangeo, for starting Pangeo, a big part of it was big data.
We have large data sets, right? And so we want to do data proximate computing.
So by putting a hub in the cloud, we're putting our compute next to the data.
Pydot actually takes it back to the laptop.
Yeah, yeah. This doesn't solve the data problem. This kind of wrecks that.
But it does give computational capabilities without.
And if you couple that with something like Coiled or any Dask solution,
where you can actually then call out to a data processing layer that is in the cloud,
cloud, it's it will it would make the need for us to operate those Jupyter hubs potentially go away
or reduce or go away. Oh, that's interesting. So you've you've got the the Dask cluster or whatever
next to the data in the cloud. And this is just like handling the results of all that. Okay,
I hadn't thought about combining those in that way. Very cool. Well, if you want if you want
to process like many terabytes of data, you're not going to do it in your browser. You're not
you're not gonna need any laptops at all.
You do need a big computer, right?
- Yeah, but still, it certainly expands what's possible
larger than maybe the first impressions.
All right, guys.
- Just a quick shout out.
We recently added a JupyterLite example tutorial
to the X-Ray homepage at xray.dev.
So if folks wanna go try out X-Ray really quick
without having to start up a JupyterLab server or something,
it's there and you can run through.
- Oh, that's fantastic.
Yeah, we've got Binder,
which sort of creates a cloud instance
to run all these examples,
but a lot of them could actually just run like this,
which is great.
Makes it a lot simpler.
Yeah.
All right.
We could talk for much longer,
but I also know that we don't have too much time left.
So let me ask you both real quickly,
the final two questions.
Joe, you can go first.
Can you write some code?
Python code, what editor do you use?
- VS Code.
- VS Code, all right.
- Or Vim if I can't.
(laughing)
- Okay.
- I use Atom and I feel like I'm behind the times,
but like that's what I use.
- That's like OG VS Code.
- It doesn't, it gets what I need to do done,
but I feel like I'm missing out on things.
So I probably need to upgrade.
But I do feel like my development environment
is increasingly owned by Microsoft.
And so I have like some mild reluctance
to switch to VS Code.
- Sure, I hear you.
Awesome.
And then a notable PyPI package,
some library you've come across lately
that you thought was awesome.
I mean, obviously shout out to Pangeo
and all of its libraries.
- But it's not a package.
Like you can't check it out in Pangeo.
- Yeah.
- I'm gonna go with one of my favorites,
which is not something I came across recently,
but I think everybody should know about it.
- I'm sure you know about it. - Yeah, that works as well, sure.
- Is FSSpec, and it's a library for accessing data
across a bunch of different file storage systems,
and it is a game changer for working with remote data.
Everyone should know about it.
- Yeah, absolutely.
That's a super interesting one.
Basically, you can connect it
to all these different backends and stuff, right?
I don't remember where to find them, but yeah,
you could connect S3 like it was a file
and stuff like that, right?
- Yep, exactly.
- Fantastic, all right, Ryan, quick.
- Well, mine is a shameless self-promotion,
but it's for a new project we have called Pangeo Forge.
- Okay.
- Which is basically an ETL tool
for this X-ray scientific data space, right?
So what we've found is that a lot of the ETL tools
that exist for business style data analytics
don't necessarily play well
with our multi-dimensional data model
that we use in geosciences and sciences more broadly.
And so we're building this open source Python package
called Pangea Forge Recipes that is designed to help us
with all this data movement,
data transformation that needs to happen
as we're migrating so many sort of legacy datasets
into this cloud native format.
- Oh, that's fantastic.
All right, yeah, good shout out.
We'll put a link to that so people can check it out.
- Right, Joe, Ryan, it's been a lot of fun.
A quick final call to action.
People wanna get started with Pangeo.
What do you say?
- Come to our forum, right?
- Yeah, you mentioned before we hit record,
you mentioned that the discuss page
is like really where the action is at right now,
the discuss forum, right?
Discourse, sorry, not discuss.
- So I mean, the tools and the stuff
is self-documenting on the website,
but what we really emphasize about Pangeo
is the community aspect of it.
We are not just trying to build a tool and put it out there.
We're really trying to build a community where scientists
are talking to software developers,
are talking to infrastructure maintainers,
are talking to data providers, and are collectively
sort of trying to keep this flywheel spinning
of innovation and development, ultimately
with the goal of empowering more scientific discoveries.
And so if you have questions, if stuff breaks,
if you don't know if it's the right tool for you,
This forum is where we can welcome you.
We don't have a Slack.
We try to be more open than as a community than a Slack.
So this is where the discussion happens.
- I can second that.
It's a good idea.
Awesome.
And then Joe, you also wanted to throw out xray.dev, right?
- Yeah, so there's, yeah, exactly.
There's, this is a relatively new site
that sits on top of our documentation site,
but there's the JupyterLite interface
is down below the fold.
and it's a great starting point for folks.
- All right, fantastic.
All right, thank you both for being here.
This has been really interesting
and thanks for all the hard work.
- Thanks for having us. - Thanks for inviting us.
- Yep, you bet, bye.